Hello everyone and welcome to today's ecosystem panel on fintech in Africa. I'm Justin, a VP of ecosystem here at the Stellar Development Foundation, and today I'm joined by four esteemed colleagues- Weeza from Chipper Cash, Joseph from
DFS Lab, Rick from ClickPesa and Tori from Leaf Global- who are all here to discuss the fintech landscape in Africa. So they're going to talk about the challenges and the opportunities they see on the continent and in the world in general. They're going to tell us about their companies and their personal journey journeys- and hopefully they'll even share some advice for budding entrepreneurs. So it's gonna be a fairly freewheeling discussion, but we will do our best to incorporate audience questions when possible. So you'll see that there's a Q&A button on your screen. Feel free to use it at any time to submit a question. Before we kick off the discussion, though, we will take a few minutes to allow each panelist to introduce themselves and to give a little context about who they are and what they're up to. And I'll start as I mentioned. I'm Justin from the Stellar Development Foundation, which is a non-profit organization that seeks to support the growth and development of the Stellar network in order to increase equitable access to the world's financial infrastructure. So at SDF, we believe Stellar has the potential to have a significant impact in the world, and we've also seen a Ton
Of interest in Stellar in Africa, which is part of why we're hosting this ecosystem panel. Our goal here is to explore the experiences of aspiring companies that are delivering digital financial services across the continent, but also we're seeking to encourage those companies. So, in addition to this panel, we're also launching the Stellar blockchain bootcamp with DFS Lab in September. We'll talk more about that at the end of the hour, so stay tuned now. I've mentioned Stellar a few times now. To make sure everyone knows what I'm talking about, I'm going to use the rest of my intro time to give a quick overview. What is Stellar at a high level? Stellar is a decentralized, open network that connects the world's financial infrastructure. It is a global public blockchain built for interoperability and to further financial access and inclusion, and it does that by making money more fluid thanks to its speed and scale and ability to represent and transfer value. It also makes markets more open because when financial infrastructure is connected, you have greater geographical and affordable access to markets and ultimately, it empowers People
Because it gives them real ownership of the value in their possession. So Stellar is a platform that allows businesses and developers all over the world to build solutions to real world problems, and many of the businesses represented on this panel do just that: they build on Stellar. So enough about Stellar. I will move on and let each of our panelists introduce themselves, starting with Wiza from Chipper Cash over to you. Thank you, Justin. Hey everyone, my name is Wiesa Talakasi. I am a Malawian living between Nairobi and Johannesburg. I am the vice president of global developer relations at Chipper Cash. Chipper Cash is a mobile wallet, the largest smartphone only mobile money service operating on the continent, with coverage across eight different African geographies as well as the UK and the United States, and we enable about 4 million users, all of our jurisdictions, to send Each
Other almost a billion dollars each and every year. We've got basic peer repair functionality, both local and international, depending on the jurisdiction that you're in. We also enable users to get virtual and physical prepaid debit cards that they can have tied to their Chipper wallet, as well as purchasing some crypto assets, namely Bitcoin, Ethereum, USDC. A few more in the pipeline as we make our crypto trading platform a bit more robust: fractional investing in U.S. Stocks, air time and data bundles across the board, as well as various kinds of bill payments for their respective jurisdictions. We're a young company, three years old, but we've managed to grow pretty quickly over the last year and a half. Right now, at 160 people, we're building on Stellar's solutions to explore the viability of cross border settlement with African stablecoins. A lot of the cross Border trade
That takes place in Africa is intermediated, somewhat unnecessarily, by the U.S. Dollar, and we think that we can take advantage of these stablecoins to facilitate inter Africa trade in a much more efficient and cost effective way. Fantastic, thank you. Next up, we have Joseph from DFS Lab. Joseph, yeah, hi, thanks, Justin. Hi everyone. I'm Joseph. Head of entrepreneur support at DFS Lab is an early stage investor in companies for custom digital commerce. We typically invest in pre seed and seed stage, you know, anywhere from twenty five thousand dollars to fifty thousand dollars, and we work with founders to help them understand their markets, help them grow their users and also help them, you know, raise bigger rounds in the future. Over the last five years, we've invested in companies like Ochova, pula suppliers,
One pipe and a bunch of other you know companies. We also run software and capital, which is at least like basically an angel club that allows seasoned and new investors to invest. You know, anywhere from 2500 upwards in companies were also invested in. So, yeah, thank you great. Next up is Rick from ClickPesa. Rick, thank you, Justin. Hi everyone, my name is Rick. I'm the co-founder and director of ClickPesa. ClickPesa has a company operating in East Africa since 2018. We provide a toolbox of digital tools such as invoicing, CRM and e-commerce solutions, combined with payments to SMEs and freelancers in East Africa. ClickPesa is active in the market- Kenya, Tanzania and Rwanda-
Helping local businesses perform better to increase productivity and profitability. Our mission is to simplify doing business for companies in or within East Africa. We've been building on Stellar since 2018, whereby last year we became an anchor on the Stellar network. ClickPesa is a small company, around 10 people, whereby most of us are operating from Tanzania and excited to talk further about Stellar in this panel. Looking forward for this, our thank you- fantastic thank you. And finally, from Leaf Global, we have Tori- take it away. Thanks, Justin. Hi, everyone really excited to be joining the Stellar community again today. You all have been such a source of support over the years, So happy to be with you. My name is Tori Samples and I'm the co-founder and CTO of Leaf Global fintech. I am based in
Kigali, Rwanda, and Leaf. I am based in Kigali, Rwanda, and Leaf currently operates in Rwanda, Uganda and Kenya, with goals to expand across the continent and into other markets eventually, such as Latin America and the Middle East, and Europe as well. We are a digital wallet that allows people to safely store and transport their money across borders. Different than other digital wallets, though, we really operate down market. We started with refugees and have expanded into cross border traders and informal merchants- people that don't have access to the formal financial system. They don't have bank accounts. They probably have a mobile money account if they're in East Africa, but that's fairly limited in that it's very expensive and difficult to cross networks and so Leaf allows them to store their money over time in different currencies, to send and receive peer to peer with friends and family and other countries for free, and they can cash in and cash out from any mobile money number and the countries in which we operate. We've also started adding in things like airtime purchase and value add services into the Wallet, and the best part
Is that it's accessible over basic phones, so you don't even need a smartphone to use Leaf. We use a technology called USSD that brings the powerful Stellar based backend- you know, all built on blockchain, into this really low tech environment where people don't need to know that there's a blockchain behind the scenes, they don't need to understand crypto to use our stablecoins and they don't need to have a smartphone or data connection, internet connection in order to use our services. Fantastic thanks, and thanks to all four of you for joining. I think so. At this point, we're just going to sort of move into a discussion and I think again, anyone who's watching feel free to submit questions via Q&A We will incorporate them into the discussion when possible. And I think generally you know we're here to sort of talk about the fintech fintech landscape in Africa and to talk about these solutions, to talk about sort of observations that the people on the panel have about what's going on in the world. And I think I kind of want to start Broad and I think the
Question that I and I think the question that I actually want to start with is: each of you have a product that incorporates blockchain, that targets a specific sort of user base. How did you identify that user base and how did you decide that blockchain was a good solution to sort of offer them? And I guess I'll, I know that this will become a more freewheeling conversation, but I think, to start with, I will just call on Tori, since she was the last to speak, sure and we might be the most niche market play of everyone represented today, so happy to start. I mentioned that we started with refugees and this became apparent to my co-founder not Robinson and I- as we were really digging into the refugee crisis before looking at the technology side. So we identified that there was this gap in the market where up to 80 of the cross border market in Africa is still cash based. It's informal, so people are crossing the border with cash in hand, which can be very dangerous, but then it also is just expensive over time, It's inconvenient and it doesn't allow people
To move into the formal economy over time. So we saw a significant gap there and in looking at ways to formalize that and to do it with a sustainable business, we saw blockchain as a really good option. This was early 2018, so the landscape was a little bit different, but we knew from the bat that or right off the bat, that Bitcoin and Ethereum were not going to be a good fit for what we needed? Because we knew that we would be dealing with small transaction sizes and a customer base that didn't have 10 minutes to an hour to wait to know the status of their transaction. And so, as we started digging into different solutions, we found Stellar through a contact of ours actually in Mexico and we found that it was a really good technical fit. And so we did look at other blockchains for sure and eventually found our way back to sellers, started building out the wallet and during that time it was interesting to see how the regulatory landscape changed as well and the attitudes towards blockchain. So, if anything, I think over the last few years
It's become an even better fit for us because Stellar makes it so much easier to work with regulators and central banks because of the stablecoin approach that we're able to take, using our own custom assets acting as a by proxy anchor for our wallet customer base. So we also we work with licensed entities to hold and move funds, so that makes it easier as well. But overall, I think the approach was: identify the problem, identify who it touches and their unique needs and then find a technical solution to fit that need. Great, does anyone else have? Like I mean, there's a lot of interesting stuff there, but before we sort of move on to talk about regulatory questions and things like that, Does anyone else have like something that they can say or perspective on how they selected their user base or how they decided to explore blockchain as a solution for problems that their users Face? How about? So let's move in
There. So on our side, we don't actually expose a lot of like blockchain functionalized to our users, except for the assets that we will we allow them to buy and sell and send and receive in the app, and we're adding a bunch of Stellar assets on there very soon, but like it's more of our operational backend, right. So you know, in a good month we'll be moving anywhere between 80 to maybe 150 million dollars a month across African currency pairs. It is very expensive to try and do a conversion to us dollars and then like convert us dollars back into whatever like destination currency that you actually have. So like I can give you an example: one of our most popular corridors is Uganda and Nigeria, both ways right. One might not typically imagine that there's quite a bit of cross border trade that takes place between those two markets, but our data seems to suggest otherwise. So we can find ourselves in a Scenario where today we have way too
Much naira in Nigeria and the other day we have got way too much ugandan shillings in Uganda. How do we quickly move money around across these currency pairs such that we are not unnecessarily losing money by doing unnecessary conversions to the us dollar at typically unfavorable rates. So you'll find that, like most forex bureaus, bureau de challenge banks will not have like an exchange rate for the nigerian naira to the ugandan shilling. But if you look at stable coin pairs, you can find either a direct the conversion rate between the two currency pairs or a currency pair that's like a lot more cost efficient than translating to the us dollar, typically something like USDC. So it started making a lot of sense to us very er early after encountering this problem that stablecoins might be the way to go here. The biggest challenge, of course, has been around getting our partners- and we work mostly With banks in many markets- to be
Able to move money around. Getting our bank partners to have a high degree of comfort around stablecoins and how those stablecoins are backed has been a bit of a challenge, though we've been able to make a lot of headway and I think the future is promising what? What's most encouraging for me about it is that once the regulators and other stakeholders start to understand the cost benefits of using this approach and once they see some examples at scale of other countries and other jurisdictions where there's been a common sense regulatory framework that has worked and has not collapsed or created some degree of chaos, it's very easy for other countries in the region to adopt and copy that sort of model. And I think it will be a much more different landscape in the next three to five years across the Continent. Great, I mean. Yeah, for us
It's been quite. We also don't really showcase it to the user, as in that, since it's a similar situation and similar reasons as Chipper Cash and I believe I wanted to add there that one of the reasons we chose the Stellar blockchain- is also the. I mean obviously, the division of the Stellar Development Foundation, which we felt very aligned with, but also a lot of action, which is also quite important. So I think SDF has been over the last couple of years, put a lot of effort behind building a good ecosystem. So, whether it be anchors, wallets, Traders, more and more parties are coming
To the ecosystems and the operations that the Stellar blockchain offers, therefore, are getting quicker and more efficient, and it also makes it cheaper, and that all in a decentralized way. One example is, for example, adding of the USDC Stellar asset, which was added earlier this year. These are all great developments that make the ecosystem much better, which benefits everyone that interacts with the ecosystem and, yeah, that's only getting better. So that has also been one of the reasons for us that we went for the Stellar blockchain- Great- and we're getting some good questions in the Q&A too, and one of them sort of touches on something that's come up a few times, which is basically regulations. And the question from Peter is: how have the participants found complying with the travel rule, Slash wire transfer regulations and demonstrating this
To regulators and banking partners? So, question about the travel rule and wire transfer regulations: are there challenges in complying with regulations? Is that one of the big challenges that you face? I guess, Rick, maybe just you can answer that one, since you're on the spot, still sure, Yeah, the countries we are operating the cryptocurrency regulation is all very young and non existing, so we we've taken quite a pragmatic approach to it and you do the trial and error approach. So, for us, for all use case, we are an anchor on the network, issuing tokens which people can buy or sell And that fitted for us in existing
Regulation. And, yeah, to be able to buy and sell, you need a bank partner. So we also regularly like sit with them and see how to adjust, how we approach regulation or compliance or AML around this. Does anyone else want to speak about sort of regulatory challenges or just regulation in general? Victoria, looks like you're ready to go sure yeah, and only because we get to have this conversation like five times a day with everyone. Right, it's the first thing that anyone asks about when they hear what we're doing, especially if we mention refugees, just because there's a stereotype there. But we actually we put all of Our customers through stringent KYC and AML
Checks at onboarding and then they're able to do transactions within the system. But of course, there are limits on that. So I think one of the advantages of building in Africa, is that widely there has been some regulatory treatment of e money in the last 10 to 15 years, starting with in pesa and Kenya and expanding into mobile money and mobile banking across the continent. And so when we approach regulators to say: this is what we're doing, this is the approach that we're taking. This is a digital representation of value that is stored and held with licensed financial institutions in fiat behind the scenes. That sounds familiar to them because it sounds it fits the framework that they have for mobile money, for example, in East Africa. So I think that we've found a lot of success using that approach, and it's definitely part of our growth strategy to identify areas that the regulatory treatment of Leaf is going to be Favorable. That's I think that is changing.
That's I think that is changing globally. And it's probably going to be a while before every country has explicit regulation on blockchain or crypto based digital wallets. But I think in the next five years there probably will be some sort of framework for e value generally. And so, again, the way that we do that, is very important for our long term success. It's not just because there's a framework here or anyone can succeed. I mean we've put a lot of thought and intention into the design to make it work for the existing frameworks, the potential for change over time and working within the maybe informal political relationships of the existing landscape, because it doesn't, At the end of the day, it might not matter only what the law says. It matters who's already in the space and how, what they're doing, how they're being treated, and so making sure that we can play nicely with licensed commercial banks, Telcos, psps, payment providers or payment processors,
That's all very important to us and so our solution is very much meant to play nicely, so that we can get traction with existing financial institutions and regulators, because if it only works at the tech layer and it doesn't work in the real world, then it doesn't work at all. So I think that's been our approach and all of that, and it seems to be working well so far, at least in East Africa. Yeah, so just to follow up on you know, tory and Rick, I'm was seeing like more well, I say kind of opening up rights of regulators. So in Nigeria, where I live, for example, there was the brush, you know, kind of ban on just general crypto Activities and almost an extent of, you
Know, making it almost, in a way, criminal. But then earlier this month, we've seen the cba and the central bank say, you know, they're working on, you know, a central bank digital currency, which is which, to me, is kind of positive. It's to me, it's, it seems to be like there's some engagement with stakeholders and then they're beginning to understand, you know, how this works and I expect that we'll continue to see that across, you know, multiple governments, across the continents. It might not be like easy over, like and as smooth as we would expect it to be, especially in countries where you don't have the framework of mobile money or a money you know for context, right and so Well, I believe it's going to be with the work that is being done by, you know, most, lots of the companies, like chipakash global will, you know, will probably see more friendliness from regulators over the coming Years, without any insights on regulatory compliance
And the challenges involved. Hopes, plans, dreams- Yeah, I guess there's two parts I'd want to think about. The first was in reference to, like, the travel rule. So we've been fortunate enough that, like a lot of our transactions- for under the FinCEN threshold limit, which was previously, I think, three thousand dollars, is now being proposed to be as low as 250- a lot of our transactions are typically below that amount but higher in frequency. So, you know, you don't have to be as stringent when following that, though we do have, like, the infrastructure in place to be able to pass on all of the relevant parameters regarding the transaction, so you know the address, the name, transaction amount, the stated purpose, etc. So we can pass that Programmatically as parameters to our payment partners
When they're processing, so they have a record of all of these informations as and when the transactions are taking place. So it's actually not that hard in terms of, you know, being compliant. What is challenging is that the regulatory frameworks are, you know, highly fragmented across markets, so you need to set up like a separate compliance structure in each and every country. Like, of the 160 people that are working at your broadcast today, about 60 of them are in the legal risk and compliance team and you know this is like a very software heavy service, like we've got like 40 engineers. So you can imagine how seriously we take that And we found that, like you know, engaging the regulator early, A lot of the times we have this almost perspective that the regulator is not pro innovation, they want things to say the certain way or that they don't understand. I think that's not the right attitude to approach conversations with the regulator. Like there are people just as much as you and me- I'm sitting- in the office of all of these Central banks, but then their incentives are
Very different from ours and what is a the most useful approach has been demonstrating technical mechanisms which satisfy the requirements and the interests that the regulators have. You know, we've been able to set up this cross border wallet in south Africa, one of the most strictly regulated financial services markets in the world by taking the surprise to say like, okay, guys, we want to do this thing. We know that no one has done it quite like this before. But how do we make it happen? As opposed to, the law says we can't make it happen. You know so. I think by taking that fragmented approach and investing in those relationships early, you'll be able to set up and scale quite quickly in some of these markets. There's another question that was asked by afolabi in regards to crypto. Saying for crypto related companies like chipper, cash will allow users to use btc on app. How do you comply with local regulations? So it's about understanding what the state of the regulation is In that market and adapting as and
When things change. Before the central bank of Nigeria directive, we allowed all of our users in Nigeria to transact. We've since disabled that functionality for those nigerian users in order to comply with the new regulation. In markets like Uganda and south Africa, where you don't have an explicit prohibition of crypto, we're able to run the services and we are actually trying to help to formulate some common sense frameworks that enable the regulator to regulate crypto effectively and even in markets like Nigeria. It's important to note that the prohibition was it is not illegal to own or hold cryptocurrencies, but the central bank did instruct centralized exchanges to not connect to the centralized banking systems. So there's been very interesting ways that people have gone around that sort of like setting up digital and physical agent networks, and we're exploring some of that in some of our markets to see whether it Might be a viable alternative. Yeah, it's
Interesting. I mean, one thing that I'm thinking about as you're telling that story is that you have to be able to adapt to sudden change. Right, you don't necessarily know what's coming next. There's a lot of uncertainty and as new information comes in, you have to sort of figure out where to steer, and you have to be pretty nimble. So I guess one thing I'm curious about from all of you is like what is the sort of most unexpected thing that's happened as you've been building your company, And how did you respond, Tori? Do you want to go ahead? I saw you come off me. No, go ahead, go for it, thanks, yeah. So there have been like several scenarios where, especially in our earlier days, when we were like operating in certain markets and we didn't have a very much for compliance structure, you know we'll be having the time of our lives- all time highs, incredible volumes- and then your Partner processor just calls you and says
We've received the cease and desist letter to shut down your services immediately. Like, and it's like at 2 am, right and like there's no explanation, there's no negotiation. There's like, yeah, you can come and talk about it next week, but, like, right now we're seizing and assisting this because we don't understand exactly what you're doing and this happens. This has happened to us quite a lot, especially in the year 2019. It's really been a function of not like really having the right relationships and having the right structures in place to manage these adverse events as and when they occur, something that is a bit counterintuitive. It's a bit controversial, but I'll still say it anyway. It's my personal belief that a lot of the people in power- sometimes the people in positions of power- They might not be there because they, like, meritocratically earned that position right. They're not like the absolute smartest people to be sitting in that role due to some other factors. Maybe there's like the president's cousin and whatever else They're sitting in some you know Really important position in a central bank
Or something. Now, that individual does not necessarily have the exposure and acumen to be able to assess the viability of your business purely on marriage, right, and that is like a fundamental reality of the structures and institutions that we have in Africa today. A lot of people seem not to pay attention to the fact that African republics, as an idea, are about 50 to 60 years old and you're applying frameworks and regulatory structures from countries that have had institutions for hundreds, if not thousands, of years. It doesn't really work the same. So in a scenario like that, in that type of environment, it is really important that you know the right people in every country, such that when you get flagged for doing something, those people are able to make a case on your behalf to help the other people who might be in positions of power to understand that you're not actually trying to break the law. You're trying to introduce a new level of innovation which is compliant, which is actually helping some of the government and the state actors to achieve their intended targets. And that is a lot easier said than Done, but I think you know investing
In, but I think you know investing in relationships and making sure that you're always communicating preemptively has been very useful in helping us maintain this type of business across the continent. I'm gonna jump on that because that's our experience, at least the first part as well. When somebody, a partner, just calls and says: we noticed this growth on your system and it's become big enough that it's been flagged by our partners and now we're gonna have to put a hold on everything until we understand exactly what's happening. And the reaction, of course, on our side is: well, we've been through these conversations. This isn't- this is not a surprise. It's great that we're growing that fast, that we, you know, caused a flip in your entire system. But that's that shouldn't be the conversation we're having today. And so I think that for us it's been a matter of intentional duplication within the system to make sure that when that happens with one partner, we can very quickly adapt and shift to another. And so Making sure that we are truly an
Integrations hub with lots of options to keep our operations going and to provide flexibility for our customers is really important. And then the other thing that I would add: I think the relationships point is spot on. Those always help, no matter where you are. But also I think there's this gap where, again, it doesn't matter at the end of the day, well, it doesn't only matter what the law says or what the regulations say. It matters who is looking at those and how they're interpreting them. And so we, before we go into any market, spend a lot of time looking at the regulatory framework and what exactly we can do and can't do, and we make sure to comply with that, because we want to be able to serve customers and we want to be able to operate and we want to stay within the law. but if you get somebody who is not in a position where that's part of their day to day job and they don't understand exactly what a blockchain Is, Perhaps behind the scenes- that's always
A big buzzword. You know they can set people's risk factors off, and so if that person is the one who is tasked with deciding somebody's fate, they usually are not the ones who want to stick their necks out on the line and so making sure that we understand exactly what the law says and we're able to communicate that effectively to people who probably should know it but really don't, has been a big challenge for us, and I think we think we're getting better at it, but we still come across it all the time. Yeah, it's interesting. I mean: well, Joseph or Rick, do you have anything to sort of add on this topic, Anything about the biggest surprises, how you've dealt with them? Now, for us it's been similar examples, similar fears of shutting down an account. And I think, especially for sort for fintechs in, especially in Africa, is that it's quite important, when
The product is evolving, that you keep flexibility in your product and because, yeah, those things are unfortunately there and, yeah, if you can't respond quick enough. That means that, yeah, it can kill your business for a while. So flexibility is definitely something you need to have as a fintech. Yeah, definitely so. In an area for my life I was the co-founder of the fintech, and these experiences are very like, very similar, where you have partners just basically in you know, in our case, you know we, our customers, just couldn't do a transaction anymore, a certain kind of trans transaction anymore. And then you know we reach out to our partners and like, oh, we, you know we cut you off because you Know this, the central bank reached out and you
Know and so, yeah, it's being able to, you know, have multiple partners constantly, like wizard said, you know, constantly being like, you know build relationships with both regulators and your partners such that you know it's easy to overcome. You know times like this but, yeah, generally they'll just always come up. You almost can't avoid them. Yeah, I guess the this is also sort of a general question. Right, if so far, we've sort of been talking about the solutions that you built and the customers that you serve, but I think there's also people in the audience who are sort of budding entrepreneurs, who are interested in hearing about your experiences actually building a fintech and, you know, being able to like sort of respond to unexpected circumstances, to be flexible. That seems like part of it, but I guess I'm also interested in any advice that you would have for someone who's interested in starting a fintech company or who's interested In scaling one that they've started. Like what, what's
Like sort of the. Is there a number one thing that you would suggest to keep in mind if you're trying to build your own business. Yeah, I can mention a thing. It doesn't only fit on fintech businesses, for starting businesses in general, Don't try to be everything and do everything. And I think in the fintech it's more important because you need to take off quite some boxes like regulation. You need to have a partner. If you, if you're doing anything with financial activity often, yeah, you need to need various of elements in your business to together to work and I think
What is important there is to really look: okay, what is your core business like? Where are you? Get in as a starting fintech business and try to outsource us as much as possible. So, yeah, don't try to build your own KYC, AML solutions. There are multiple players in the market and then that's for those other activities as well. Try to focus on your core and, yeah, utilize your existing solutions in the market. Of course, that's a little bit different when you grow, but I think it's very important to do that in the beginning. I think mine would be similar to that along the lines of the core business team, I think I would just say for someone starting ventucker otherwise, but especially fintech: know the details, because there's so much that technology can Do these days that we often forget why we're
Doing things or what we need to really be successful. We see success stories in the news every day and it seems like you could throw any tech solution at the wall and something would stick. But I think that, especially for fintech- being in a highly regulated space, especially for building in markets that might not have as robust of an environment- whether that's Africa or somewhere else- it really does come down to knowing the details. of your customers and their ux ui preferences and their needs on a day to day basis and their comfort level with technology, Knowing the regulatory landscape, knowing your partner's comfort level with risk and any stipulations that they might have to adhere to or that they might be under. So I think that the details are where it can fall apart or succeed greatly, But knowing them enables you to set up a
Business that has a much higher chance of success and then be able to effectively defend those decisions over time. Because if you're building in the fintech landscape, You're going to have to defend every single one of the thousands of decisions that you make on a day to day basis to potential investors and partners and regulators and customers and anyone else who touches your ecosystem. So I think as much as you can know and be able to defend that, the better. Joseph orweeza, you want to touch this one? Well, oh, very, you know, very similar it's. And it's like Rick said, it's beyond just fintechs, right, it's basically knowing, like knowing your, you know your product, knowing what you're trying to build. I think one of the best ways to
Put it will, one of the best ways to put it will be to build the product first, before the business. Right, it's a bit tricky in a fintech, especially with regulation and stuff, but it's mainly in a way you- I believe that you still have you- have some room to ask for forgiveness, you know, before begging for permission, right, and so for as much as you can play. I'll say, like you know, just get, make sure that you have a solid understanding, like Tori said, of the product you're trying to build, of your users, of what they want, of what is really important to them and, in the same vein, almost at the same time, work on building very strong relationships with you know, partners. Your relationship with partners will probably, in many cases, make or break you. It's very important that you make sure that those relationships are strong and, in many cases, they'll protect You, especially if you're, like you know, a fintech
Starting out. Most of your partners are probably going to be the ones to protect you from, you know, like heavy hits from regulators, right? So, making sure those relationships are, you know, are really tight and I think wizard referenced you know, kind of finding out what their motivations are and then you know, walking around those, just as opposed to beyond just regulators, just your partners. Know where your partner's motivations are and make sure that you know you're working with them, You know, to achieve whatever they also want to achieve while you're achieving what you want to achieve. So basically, yeah, is that anything to add? No, I think, between what Tori and Joseph have shared. They have captured all of my ideas. Great, I mean One thing I think about as you're discussing all this is, I think,
Okay, the Stellar network is a great back end platform for sort of storing and transferring value. And ideally, in my mind at the sitting here at the Stellar Development Foundation, I imagine that all these different organizations, ecosystem participants would build on the network and be able to like, interoperate right, to be able to work with one another, to forge partnerships, to make payments across borders and across currencies. But I also realized that that's a sort of. You know, that's my utopian vision of how Stellar should work, And I'm curious about your views on interoperating with other people in the Stellar ecosystem or in sort of the fintech ecosystem in general. How important is it that your sort of solutions that you're building play well with others? And what are the biggest chat like doesn't do they currently? And if and whether they do or not, like sort of what are the biggest challenges to Interoperation? I have a bunch of thoughts on this
One, so I think interoperability is like the next big barrier for digital financial services. Across the continent, We have seen relatively high penetration in terms of, especially urban centers, but, like you know, we still have a long way to go in digitizing finance. Right network international, who operates probably the largest point of sale terminal network for banks across the continent. Their latest data from last year indicates that 93 of transactions across the continent- retail transactions- are still in cash. So all of this fintech we're doing is lovely and the volumes are impressive, but like we have a long way to go, that's one now. Another side of that bucket is that different countries have got fragmented solutions on a per country basis. So even in individual markets, native interoperability is not yet where it needs to be. There are a few notable examples: Tanzania has got really good, Interrupt Uganda, so and so I'm not sure about the
Latest So and so I'm not sure about the latest in Rwanda. Maybe tory can chime in there- but there's still quite a lot of work to be done on a national level. Once we have the national systems, all of the digital financial systems, interoperable- and I'm pleased to see that over the last three years a lot of the bank and mobile money interoperability problems in East Africa and southern Africa have been solved quite well. But once we have that national interoperability, the next question is now around, like international transactions interoperability- and it was, I think, actually this week- that afri exim bank is piloting a continental payment system that is going to be used to facilitate a trade of intra Africa currency pairs like the ones that I described earlier. This is consistent with the African continental free trade areas policy towards unifying Africa, towards a single market. So I do think that, like you know, interoperability is probably the most important Thing we have to do at this stage. It
Doesn't we have to do at this stage, it doesn't matter. If you know, my money is sitting in cheaper and Tori has hers in leave? Why can't I send my money from my Chipper wallet to tory's Leaf wallet? We both support the ron and frank. We both support the kenyan shipping. We have a long way to go. Some of the standards that are being developed, such as moja loop, could be something that's quite exciting, but again, they're targeted towards specific verticals, that is, the telco industry. We're over the top financial service players. If we don't do interoperability, we'll end up with a scenario where you've got many monopolies in various regions, which is almost the status quo to date. So definitely something that needs to happen. I think that blockchains are an obvious solution towards interoperability. I just haven't seen. I think that the biggest barrier- the technology exists today, but the biggest barrier is fintechs in Africa don't have like a unified association the way the telcos do so. Moja loop is being pushed to the telcos through the gsma, which is the industry association. The first thing we need To do is unionize and bring out an association
Of over the top of financial service players and then agree on what sort of standards we're going to use for interoperability. I don't think it's been as much of an issue in other markets because Europe has got the eurozone. So if the currency is natively interoperable, you don't have to worry. The United States is a single market, china is also a single market. But we compare ourselves with these regions and meanwhile we are 54 very distinct and very unique countries with unique needs, challenges and opportunities. So definitely I think the next unicorns- are going to be interoperability platforms out of Africa, and it's a fantastic opportunity for those who are willing to give it a shot in solving. I completely agree with that. I think the fragmented markets that you mentioned are the biggest opportunities as well. So if the telcos are not going to solve that- you know, in Rwanda today it's Very difficult to send between mtn and airtel- if
They're not going to solve it for themselves because of the competition between those, then that's an incredible opportunity for somebody like Leaf or tripper or other fintech plays, to come in and solve it for them. So I've been excited to see that there are definitely companies stepping into those gaps. I think they've started at the business level, so the b2b plays- that's been a lot easier- and then, hopefully, the benefits of interoperability and bridge plays will come down to the consumer level over time. That's where Leaf is trying to play, of course, and we see significant opportunity there and I genuinely hope that others will come into the space as well, because it is such a fragmented market and there is so much opportunity. I think one thing that is a potential barrier to interoperability is the word itself, and so I don't know if it's, I don't, and so I don't know if it's helpful. Just to start with talking about integrations, everybody Loves integrations, right, they're easy, we know how to
Do them, they're very accessible for most companies, and so if, instead of going into you know a room full of people and saying, hey, let's all become interoperable, if it's having those conversations to say how can you and I integrate today and over time? That creates a network? Fantastic, it'll help us get there. And so for myself- you know, I look at it and I'm like, well, great, we already have assets for rondon frank's, canyon shillings, Uganda shillings on the Stellar network. That's very easy for us to push into chipper's wallet, for example. So you know, if we want to have a conversation after this and talk about what that looks like, great, because we already have that asset. I think that my fear in this is that we keep abiding. by the same playbook over time. And so it's. You know Leaf created these assets because we didn't see anybody else out there who had them. But you know that's that could also be justified for other companies coming into the space. You Know, if they're a new company in Rwanda that
Have wanted to have their own rondon frank coin on Stellar, they could do that. It's unnecessary. They should just use ours and we should learn how to play nicely together. But I understand the business reasoning and the fear that could create that landscape where everyone just continues to do their own thing. So I think we are very pro integration and very pro interoperability. Stellar is a good tool for that and I think, as the network is still fairly limited in Africa, but it's growing, and we hope that, you know, by sharing our experiences and our lessons learned- there's been a lot of them- potentially we can help other players coming into that space as we're growing ourselves, because, of course, we're still very new in the game as well. Great, I mean, Joseph, do you have something to add to that? Yeah, so I really like. Taurus points on integrations. That's Actually, that seems to be like a more or
Kind. That seems to be like a more or kind of like friendly approach, One thing. So we talked about mojo loop, and so I've been kind of involved with that movement for a bit. One of the issues, you see, is many, com many, you know, startups that should adopt it- All are looking to adopt it- to realize that, for example, you probably need to have like a switch right in Nigeria- It's going to cost you a lot of money to have like a switching license right- And then you have this thing where the startups say they want to come together and then build like one switch that they can use to connect, like you know, moja loop in another country. There's like all that kind of complexity around it and so just starting with integration seems to me like a very, like, you know, fair approach, like you know, as much as possible. If lots of startups, You know puts together the exposed apis, like to
Connect to each other, then maybe that's that'll be like a great start and then we can start talking about, you know, connecting across different brothers, like countries. So that looks that sounds very, you know, plausible to me. Yeah, I wanted to add to that will be interesting to see a couple of players in the African market that actually try to become such a central switch. For example, mfs Africa is trying to do that- and then on the other side you have, of course, Stellar, which is try to achieve that in a decentralized way with, as a non-profit having a Certain open source standards. It will be interesting to see,
Yeah, which way it's gonna. It's going to lean, whether it will be more with a central party or it will go decentralized. And I think it will take a bit of time, but expect that at some point it will lean more decentralized on, for example, Stellar, open source and having open source standards and actually, yeah, a central party, or that's at least what I hope. because if it becomes a central party- one or two players- then it's the question whether it really becomes cheaper. Great, thank you so I personally feel like that's a great place to end this sort of dream of hope that these standards for integrations become, you know, sort of tend towards the Open source, Of course, as someone at the SDF who
Is prizes for the, someone at the SDF who is prizes for the open source culture and believes that this network should be permissionless and owned by everyone and easily accessible, and that we should work together to create similar standards rather than having one single party own them. That sounds great to me and I would love to see that happen, but of course, you know, what is interesting is that what happens next is up to the people here and the people listening, people in the world in general, the people who are building businesses, and also to their users. Like what is going to succeed- And I think only time will tell- But at this point I do want to take these last few minutes because, as I mentioned at the top of the presentation, or at the top of the panel, we, the SDF, are working with DFS Lab to sponsor a bootcamp and I just want to take these last few minutes so that anyone to give some information, so that anyone listening understands what that means, what it can do for them and how to apply, and so I want to thank everyone for their Participation. Thank you so much and pass it over to
Joseph so he can. And pass it over to Joseph so he can tell us a little bit about the bootcamp. Yeah, thanks, Justin. So we're working. So DFS Lab is working with the Stellar Development Foundation. It's to kind of open up an opportunity for early to mid stage startups who are interested in building a solution for on Stellar, who are interested in building on Stellar for Africa we are looking, you know at, Basically it's it they block. The bootcamp follows like a you know design sprint approach where over a period of three days, you go from you know idea to prototype in, where you follow a bunch of steps right to go from idea to prototype by three day period. And then we Have demo day on the fourth day where startups or
Participants can win, you know, anywhere from five thousand to twenty thousand USDC in prices, So the most promising startups you know, during the event and there are also opportunities for follow up funding from the Stellar Development Foundation enterprise fund and other investors who, at the boots, got the demo day right And then- and it's kind of open to fintechs, open to companies that are currently building on the blockchain and then companies that are just, you know, thinking of it, like the way we refer to them as cryptocurious companies who are building in Africa. It's open to so to any of those type of people to apply. You can visit the websites that you see on the screen right Now. The link on the screen to apply applications clues
On the 20th of August and, yeah, if you have any questions about it, feel free to email me. That's Joseph dfslab net, but I'm fairly positive. Like you know, you have all the information you need on the website, So please feel free to apply. We're looking forward to having you during the event. Great, yeah, thanks everyone. So, obviously, as Joseph said, you can visit that link on the screen to find out more. You can email Joseph dfslab net. Applications, as it says, close August 20th and our goal here is to sort of help support and incubate projects in Africa that are focused on fintech solutions that solve real world problems and that's the end I really want to say that this was It was a Real privilege to have all four of you here. Thank
You so much. I- all four of you here- thank you so much. I know that we just scratched the surface, but I feel like we started to get into some interesting areas and to talk about, you know, what's going on in the region in integrations and also, I think, there was some really interesting nuggets for people who are interested in building their own companies or scaling their own companies. So I really appreciate it and I hope that everyone out there listening- also came away with something. We do plan to have more of these ecosystem roundtables in the future, so you can always find out more about those by just going to `stellar.org/events`. Thanks everyone for participating and for watching.